1. Introduction: Purpose of the deliverable, contributions of partners, and relationships between the work done in this task with other work packages. Particularly, this section highlights the relation between the ontology design methodology devised in this task and other lines of work of the project such as the use case methodology and the semantic integration process.2. Ontology design methodology: Purposes of ontology design, evaluation of existing methodologies including the most relevant precedents of methodologies for ontological design. Since no methodological approach takes into account the integration of data sources and their querying using federated access, SEMANCO's design methodology has been devised. It is composed of three phases -vocabulary building, implementation and evaluation-which are described in this section, as well as their sub tasks: Vocabulary capture, Building of an initial vocabulary, Data sources' vocabularies mappings, TBox coding, Data sources integration, and Evaluation. Finally, how this methodology has been applied and integrated in the overall project development is described.3. Properties of SEMANCO's ontology: Description of the base structure which has been built upon modules of the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO). The details of the two hierarchies, based on subsumption and aggregation properties, are described. The application of the DL-Lite A formalism is presented. Further the main features that must be taken into account in the SEMANCO context are described: data properties have to be functional, the explicit definition of domains and ranges should only allow data properties, and the domains and ranges of object properties must be specified by means of axioms. The definition of the units of measure is also included in this section. The values of the data sources are related to a specific class of unit of measure which is based on the SUMO ontology. Finally, the annotation 2013-05-15properties are illustratedlabels, comments, references, and authors. These have been implemented in the ontology and are fully supported by the ontology editor.4. Conclusions: Contributions of the semantic energy model to the project development particularly as a mediator schema for individual data sources. The most important featuresthe use of the upper-level modules of the SUMO ontology, the application of DL-Lite A formalism to optimize data access, and the specification of units of measure based on SUMO modulesare outlined. The semantic energy model developed in this task is one of the first implemented ontologies using the DL-Lite A formalism.Appendices:
A representative sample of the ontology code can be found in the Appendix. It includes the definition of the object property, data properties, classes and the DL-Lite A axioms.INTRODUCTION 1.Purpose and target group
The purpose of this deliverable is to report about the work done in Task 4.2 Design of a semantic energy model.The semantic energy model is a formal ontologyspecified using Web Ontology Language 2 (OWL 2)comprising concepts developed within the SEMANCO project that have been captured from diverse documents concerning standards, use cases and activity descriptions and data sources containing data related to the three case studies. It provides the language to understand and interpret the complexity of different data sources and their interrelations; a language which enables semantic tools and users to use the data stemming from different domains and applications. Specifically, the language consists of the terms and attributes necessary to describe regions, cities, neighbourhoods and buildings, as well as to relate this to energy related data including climate and socio-economic factors.Ontologies are a central component of the SEIF. Their purpose is twofold i) helping to integrate data distributed in heterogeneously structured data sources, ii) facilitating data access and interoperability of tools used to evaluate energy performance in urban planning.Ontology designers and technicians are the main target groups of this document. However the structure of the vocabulary of the semantic energy model is also of interest for domain experts such as urban planners and energy advisors.Contribution of partners
The work carried out in Task 4.2 was led by FUNITEC and HAS. POLITO has collaborated with the work done in Tasks 3.2 and 3.3, whose outputs are instrumental for this task.The ontology has been coded by HAS and FUNITEC using an ontology editor developed in Task 4.3 by HAS.The report has been jointly written by HAS and FUNITEC. The internal review has been carried out by Ilaria Ballarini (POLITO) and Martin Carpenter (UoT) who has also done the final proofreading.Relations to other activities in the project
The semantic energy model is the core component of the Semantic Energy Information Framework (SEIF), which in turn is the central component of the entire environment developed in the project.The implementation of the semantic energy model is the logical consequence of the work done in Work Package 3 which provided the specification of the informal vocabulary, the identification of data sources and their informal mapping onto a vocabulary. Therefore, the semantic energy model is used as the mediating schema for the representation of the semantics of the data sources. The single data source schemas are mapped onto semantic energy model and by this means, interlinked with each other. The terminology of the semantic energy model, formally specified as an ontology TBoxAn ontology design process has been devised and it is aligned with (Figure -The use cases methodology described in Deliverable 1.8 Project Methodology. Use cases bring together information about actors, policies and activities to fulfil a goal at a particular scale. This information is the first input of the ontology design methodology.-The semantic integration process described in Deliverable 4.1 Environments for collaborative ontology mapping. This process relies on the existence of a global ontology which acts as a reference for the data sources. Furthermore, the semantic integration process covers the mapping coding stage of the ontology design methodology. ONTOLOGY DESIGN METHODOLOGY
Methodologies to build ontologies are needed to avoid the unnecessary duplication of work and to reduce the rate of design errors. The relevant work on ontology design was started by A methodology for the design of the semantic energy model has been devised to take into account the integration of multiple data sources with the purpose to facilitate integrated access to these sources. This methodology supports ontology design decisions with reference to the semantic integration process described in Deliverable 4.1. On the one hand, it helps to analyse and effectively reflect structures and terms used in the data sources and in the resulting ontology code. On the other hand, this methodology determines the design of data source mappings described in D4.1 as well as the design of the queries carried out by the tool that are being developed in the Work Package 5.SEMANCO's ontology design has been carried out according to the process model described in -A vocabulary building phase which comprises the specification of use cases, building of an initial vocabulary and the assembling of informal mapping tables, revealing relations between terms of vocabularies used in individual data sources and terms forming the initial vocabulary.-An implementation phase which embraces formal TBox coding and integration of data sources into the Semantic Energy Information Framework with the purpose of enabling federated query processing on the basis of the distributed data sources.-An evaluation phase aimed at the assessment of the Semantic Energy Model, coded on OWL and at the data source mappings coded in D2RQ language 2013-05-15
Figure Vocabulary building
Vocabulary capture
The first step of the ontology design process relies on the capture of the base terminology for the ontology. To perform high quality conceptualisation and to give appropriate names to the ontology concepts it is important to take into consideration the users' perspective. In the SEMANCO project, this was achieved through the use case specifications that were created at the beginning of the ontology design process. As has been described in Deliverable 1.8, use case specifications are based on a specification template consisting of a set of attributes, i.e. goal, urban scale, process scale, authors, related policy framework and a list of activities (Table . Relationships between activities and use cases
In turn, each activity is specified using a template that is similar to the one used for the specification of use cases. The activity specification template (Table 2013-05-15
Table The graphic representation of use cases and the detailed specification of activities help to understand the users' requirements, to identify the data they need, to set the semantics of the data, and to determine the desired level of value aggregation. Yet, the activity specifications not only serve for the vocabulary capturing. Also, they are an ideal instrument for query design that becomes essential in the context of data integration. As stated above, in the SEMANCO project the query design serves as a connection between the ontology development (Work Package 4) and the development of end-users' tools (Work Package 5).The use case driven approach for ontology capturing is similar to the goal modelling approach presented in Building the initial vocabulary
The second step of the ontology design process takes use case and activity specifications as an input and has the goal of defining an initial vocabulary, that is, a categorized set of terms connected with each other by simple relations. At the same time, the terms of the vocabulary  In this table, the terms can be related with two types of relation: subsumption (is) and aggregation (has). For instance in Table Building an initial vocabulary is an important intermediate step towards the design of the semantic energy model. It simplifies formal ontology coding significantly by using a formal language like OWL.Mappings of data sources' vocabularies
In this third and last step of the vocabulary building phase, the names of the data entities from sources that have been integrated are mapped to the initial vocabulary. If a target data source is a relational data base, then the fields of their tables are mapped to the terms of the initial vocabulary. Such mapping is specified with a table as the one shown in Table Implementation
The implementation phase of the process model encompasses two tasks: TBox coding and mapping data sources.TBox coding
The semantic energy model has its basis on the DL-Lite A formalism which outperforms most of the other description logic formalisms in the context of managing data distributed in heterogeneously structured sources. The coding of the Semantic Energy Model's is carried out by SEMANCO's ontology editor described in Deliverable 4.3 User interfaces for knowledge representation (Figure Figure 4. SEMANCO's ontology editor facilitates simultaneous graphic presentations of selected ontology parts
At the core of the coding process lies the ontology TBox. Most of the individuals and data values are naturally specified in the data sources to be integrated. Exceptionally there might be a set of individuals related to management and the calculation of units of measure that belong to the core of the semantic energy model and hence, they are specified in the implementation phase. This part of the ontology is described in Section 3.3.Mapping data sources
In this step, the informal mappings of data sources vocabulariessuch as those shown in Table The creation of these mappings is a complex process which involves experts from different domains having different skills. Furthermore, the mappings should be aligned with the TBox ontology created in step 4. This requires an understanding of both the structure of the ontology and the data sources. To support this process, two environments were developed in Deliverable 4.1 Environments for collaborative ontology mapping, using D2RQ language: a) the OWL mapping extractor to extract an OWL ontology file and a D2RQ mapping file from the structure of a relational database; b) the ontology mapping collaborative web environment that provides a graphical interface to assist non-ontology experts to implement the mappings. Evaluation
With regard to the data integration goal, the following three properties of the Semantic Energy Model are evaluated:TBox Intelligibility: the ability of actors that use the ontology to understand the ontology structure. Mappings compliance: correspondence of mappings with the TBox. Computational efficiency: the ability of the ontology to support conjunctive querying on high efficiency level, for example, with a comparatively short response time.TBox Intelligibility: especially as a consequence of vocabulary mappings in step 3, the initial structure and semantics of the vocabulary designed in step 2 of the development process (Figure Mappings compliance:
The purpose of this evaluation strategy is to reveal mappings that do not correspond to the TBox of the Semantic Energy model. As shown in Rodriguez ( Computational efficiency: in the focus of this methodology is the evaluation of the query processing. Queries used for the evaluation are generated on the basis of the use cases and activity description specified in step 1 (Figure Ontology development process
The ontology design methodology is a transversal process which is carried out in different tasks of the project. Figure 2013-05-15 PROPERTIES OF SEMANCO'S ONTOLOGY
Base structure
Following a modular approach to ontological design, the semantic energy model has been built on with modules of the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO). In this way, each concept of the semantic energy model is subsumed at least by one concept of SUMO. The foundational relationships and axioms from SUMO remain valid in the semantic energy model. The solutions to the philosophical, engineering and linguistic issues addressed by the SUMO ontology are inherited by the semantic energy model.The selection of SUMO as upper-level ontology was made following a comparative analysis with four other foundational ontologies; DOLCE, PROTON, General Formal Ontology (GFO) and Basic Formal Ontology (BFO). SUMO scored well in terms of simplicity of understanding, applicability for reasoning and inference purposesespecially from the time performance perspectiveand number of concepts related to the domain of interest, in particular urban planning. For example, the concept Building of the semantic energy model is subsumed by SUMO's concept of StationaryArtifact and SUMO's Attribute subsumes Geometry, which, in turn subsumes BuildingGeometry, both are defined in the Semantic Energy Model:The resulting semantic energy model consists of two hierarchies: one is the taxonomy based on the concept of subsumption (Figure DL-Lite A formalism
For the coding of the semantic energy model, we have selected the DL-Lite A formalism. The DL-Lite A was designed taking into account the requirements of data integration The most important features of DL-Lite A are the following: 1) the restriction requiring that all data properties have to be functional; 2) the rule determining that explicit specification of domains and ranges of roles is allowed only for data properties; for instance, roles connecting individuals of a concept with a domain of values, real or integer, and its prohibition for object properties, for example, roles connecting individuals of two concepts; and 3) the requirement to specify domains and ranges of object properties by means of axioms. For example, the following axioms in DL notation use subsumption (⊑), existence Units of measure
The data sources to be integrated by means of the Semantic Energy Information Framework (SEIF) contain a lot of values. Most of them are measures specifying physical quantities, such as area, volume, energy consumption or CO 2 emission. These data are often defined by different standardization systems, for example data specifying one physical quantity can use different units of measure (meter and feet, kilogram and pounds, litre and gallons). There are many reasons for this constellation, for instance in different European countries, different standardisation systems are adopted. Furthermore, some data sources emerged in an ad-hoc process wherein standardisation was not really a consideration. Therefore, to facilitate the interoperability of SEMANCO's tools that use integrated data, a conversion of measures between different systems of units is required. The calculation mechanism for such conversion is a part of the query. Yet, the values for calculation as well as the vocabulary specifying units of measure are parts of the ontology.After analysing existing ontologies, two ontology modules for units of measure management were preselected. One of these ontologies was the QUDTAnnotations
Annotations are key components of an ontology which enable users to understand its structure and ideas underlying the conceptualisation. Furthermore, these properties (e.g. name, description, references) are relevant to the technological development of the semantic energy model and to the tools developed in Work Package 5. Four annotation properties have been defined for each concept using the ontology editor:Label. It is the formal name of the concept which will be used in the tools interface. For example, the concept of Electrical_Appliances_Power_Installed has the label of Power installed of the electrical appliances. Currently, the label is in English but more than one label can be provided using language tags such as @en, @es or @dk.Comment. This annotation property contains the description of the concept. The description is provided by the domain expert in the second step (Building of an initial vocabulary) of the ontology design methodology (see Section 3.1.2). This description primarily comes from the existing standardization systems and related domain publications. However it can be written ad-hoc if it is not covered by the standards.2013-05-15
Reference. This property is used to state the standardization systems have been used to name and describe the concept.Author. The name of the person who has created the concept. In this way, it is possible to track who has done what. Since the coding step of the methodology has been carried out by different people, this annotation property may be useful.2013-05-15
CONCLUSIONS
Contribution to overall picture
In this document we have described the most important features of the semantic energy model -a formal ontology developed in the project of SEMANCO to support the management of buildings energy and CO 2 emission related data-and the process to model it. Both the ontology and the methodology are based on current research in the fields of knowledge representation and ontology design.The most relevant contribution of the semantic energy model is that it combines ontology design with the integration of data sources into one single process model. Thus, the applied methodology explicitly requires formal and informal mappings of data sources vocabularies and an evaluation of the ontology by means of querying data sources managed by this ontology.In sum, the most important features of the semantic energy modelembracing 592 concepts and 468 relations implemented with 3459 axioms in DL-Lite A stylecan be summarized as the following:-The use of selected upper-level modules of the SUMO ontology; -The application of DL-Lite A aiming at optimization of data access; and -The system for specification of units of measure that extends those provided by the SUMO module while keeping a balance between high expressivity and time performance of reasoning.Impact on other WPs and Tasks
The semantic energy model developed in this task is a core piece of the SEIF. It relies on the work done in Work Package 3 since the Standard Tables developed in Task 3.2 and Task 3.3 were used to build the ontology.The ontology has been coded using an ontology editor developed in Task 4.3.The purpose of the Task 4.5 Semantic energy information framework integration is to develop a federation engine which gives access to the SEMANCO tools, which are being developed in Work Package 5.Contribution to demonstration
The semantic energy model developed in this task contributes in the demonstration since it is a central component of the SEIF which will enable users of the SEMANCO platform to query data stored in distributed sources.Other conclusions and lessons learned
To our knowledge, the semantic energy model is one of the first implemented ontologies using the DL-Lite A formalism. The experience of its application must be of high value for the group of researchers working on data integration using semantic technologies.Moreover, the concepts underlying the applied methodology for ontology design go beyond the state of the art. To our knowledge, a methodology combining ontology design with data integration techniques, such as formal an informal mapping of data sources vocabularies and query design has not been applied before.2013-05-15The ontology as well as the process modeling will be further developed as the project continues, especially in connection to the addition of more data sources.Initially, it was planned to publish the semantic energy model in the repository supported by the ICT4e2B project (http://www.ict4e2b.eu/). After this project was completed, the European Commission migrated the repository to a new technological service platform in order to ensure its access to the research community continuity. The new site is called eeSemantics space Library (https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/fpfis/wikis/display/eeSemantics).The semantic energy model presented in this document will be shared with the research community in the eeSemantics space Library.2013-05-15GLOSSARY
TBox
The TBox contains the terminology of an ontology also known by intensional knowledge which usually does not change. It comprises the conceptualization statements of an ontology including concepts and relation.ABox
The ABox is the assertion component of an ontology which contains the facts. It is also called extensional knowledge and includes the data modelled according to the TBox concepts.RDF
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a directed, labelled graph specification for representing information in the Web. It is based upon the idea of making statements about resources. A resource is represented with a set of triples which are subject-predicate-object expressions.OWL
The Web Ontology Language is a knowledge representation language for coding ontologies. OWL can be used to explicitly represent the meaning of terms in vocabularies and the relationships between those terms. OWL is built on top of RDF. This representation of terms and their interrelationships is called TBox. See further information in the SEMANCO wiki: http://arc.housing.salle.url.edu/semanco/kms/index.php/OWLOWL formalism
OWL provides different sublanguages that offer advantages in terms of expressiveness. OWL Lite, OWL DL, and OWL Full. Each of these sublanguages has dialects determined to be used in particular scenarios. This project is focused on the OWL DL Lite A dialect due to its good performance in reasoning tasks which require conjunctive queries of large data volumes.SPARQL
SPARQL is a computer language used to make queries into databases stored in RDF format. SPARQL can be used to express queries across diverse data sources, whether the data is stored natively as RDF or viewed as RDF via middleware based on mappings.Mappings
In the context of data integration, mappings are the explicit relations between a relational schema and an ontology. In the semantic web context, a mapping define how it is transformed the contents of a relational database into RDF.Subsumption
A hierarchical relation between two concepts of an ontology. It can be used in concept specialization. When a concept is subsumed by another is called subconcept. For example, ResidentialBuilding is subsumed by Building, therefore the first concept is a sub type of the second one.Figure 1 .
Figure 3
2
Figure 5 .
Figure 6 .
Figure 8 .
Figure 9 .
Table 1 .
 Local urban regulations (PGOUM, PERI, PE in Spain)  Technical code of edification and national energy code (CTE, Calener in Spain)Table 3 .
Table 4 .
A TBox is the part of an ontology comprising concepts, roles and axioms, which is contraposed to an ABox consisting of facts or objects represented by labels (URIs) and values.http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-profiles/http://www.qudt.org/ (Accessed 14/03/2013)2013-05-15