Introduction
The reuse potential of ontologies and its benefits has been one of the main claims for ontology development since the first studies in the ontological field ( [1-3], etc.). This vision and argument has driven research to reach the point in which ontology registries (e.g. BioPortal In addition, as presented in [6], ontology reuse is often not performed by means of importing the reused ontologies (hard reuse), but just by referencing the reused ontology elements URIs (soft reuse). Fig. Advocates of the soft reuse claim that the imported ontology may become unavailable on the web. It is also argued that, frequently, the union of the reused ontology and the reusing one is inconsistent if a hard reuse is performed. There are intermediate situations between hard and soft reuse. For example, a sub-tree of the reused ontology may be copied in the reusing one. In contrast to hard reuse, the update of the reused ontology is not propagated to the reusing one. Katsumi and Grüninger's [7] work is useful to understand the different situations that may arise in reuse. These authors define reuse as the application of a series of operations to the ontology to be reused with the purpose of axiomatizing the intended conceptualization. The operations identified by Katsumi and Grüninger are presented below:1. as_is: reuse of an ontology without modifying it. This operation is equivalent to hard reuse without modifying the imported ontology. 2. extraction: reuse by removing some original axioms. This operation is equivalent to hard reuse removing some axioms.In the extreme case, that is, if all the axioms are removed, and just some terms are taken to be reused, the operation is equivalent to soft reuse. 3. extension: reuse by adding new axioms to the ontology. This operation is equivalent to hard reuse adding new axioms to the imported ontology. Another way of reuse is the extraction of Ontology Design Patterns (ODPs) [8]. For example, it is possible not to reuse any SSN term, but to reuse its Sensor, Observation, Sample, and Actuator (SOSA) pattern. This case of reuse is outside the scope of this paper.Based on our experience, we also detected a set of ontologies (FOAF, Consequently, and in order to provide an analysis of the ontology reuse, the following objectives were defined:• Obj 1: Measure reuse, hard reuse and soft reuse: the questions associated with this objective are the following: what is the proportion of entities reused by another ontology (reuse)?; what is the proportion of imported entities (hard reuse)?; what is the proportion of neither imported nor defined entities (soft reuse)? Do these proportions vary depending on whether they are calculated focusing just on classes or just on properties? Is there a set of ontologies that is reused in most of LOV ontologies?• Obj 2: Measure reuse across the same domain: this objective is focused on the question: what is the proportion of ontologies that reuse other ontologies belonging to the same domain ?• Obj 3: Identify factors that hamper reuse: given that the essential feature of ontologies is their reuse potential, it is critical to answer the following question: what are the main obstacles when reusing ontologies across the same domain?Objective 1 is an update on Poveda and colleague's work [6], which is mainly focused on hard and soft reuse, but it does not deepen in the rest of the objectives.LOV [9] is a general purpose ontology registry, and, as such, it includes ontologies from very different domains. Before adding a new ontology into the registry, LOV curators carry out a verification process in order to guarantee that it contains human and machine readable information, that some minimal metadata is provided, etc. By July 2016, LOV had registered around 500 ontologies in different domains . Therefore, throughout this study LOV is considered to be a good source to acquire the data needed in order to reach the above-mentioned objectives 1 and 2, and to provide ontologies to analyze in order to reach Objective 3. The data extraction from LOV was performed by an ad-hoc developed Java code based on the OWL-API. The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section 2 dwells on the research methodology we followed for the study. Section 3 provides the obtained results during the study while Section 4 offers a discussion of such results. Section 5 focuses on related work. Finally, conclusions and future trends are outlined in Section 6.Research methodology
An empirical approach was followed to reach the objectives mentioned above. Since objectives 1 and 2 can be approached in a quantitative way, they were addressed in statistical terms. In contrast, Objective 3 required a qualitative approach and, therefore, was achieved basing on the authors' experience in a real ontology development use case. Once the use case has been analyzed, the generalization study was carried out computationally checking if the obstacles found in candidate ontologies to reuse in the use case were present in other LOV ontologies.For objectives 1 and 2, the particular steps carried out are presented below:1. Definition of outstanding variables. 2. Evaluation of the variables by means of data collection. 3. Data analysis by means of (mainly) descriptive statistics.The following sections (from Section 2.1 to Section 2.3) show how each one of these steps were performed. The last section, Section 2.4 shows the methodology followed to attain Objective 3.Definition of variables
To carry out this step, authors took into account that, according to their experience, reuse is different in classes and in properties. This led to a distinction between reuse in classes, object properties and data properties. The variables defined below are evaluated for each ontology.The following variables represent the size of the ontology:• Number of classes (c).• Number of object properties (op).• Number of data properties (dp).• Total number of entities (total = c + op + dp).The following variables account for the entities that had been hard reused in the ontology:• Number of imported object properties (iop).• Number of imported data properties (idp).• Total number of imported entities (ti = ic + iop + icp).These other variables account for the entities that had been soft reused in the ontology:• Number of neither defined nor imported classes (ndnic). They are the classes that are in the ontology by means of soft reuse.• Number of neither defined nor imported object properties (ndnop).• Number of neither defined nor imported data properties (ndndp).• Total number of neither defined nor imported entities (tndni = ndnic + ndnop + ndndp). For the total reuse, the following variable was defined:• Total number the reused entities (total_reuse = ti + tndni).Out of the former variables, the following percentages of reuse are calculated:• Percentage of reused classes (per_reuse_c = (ic + ndnic) * 100/c). • Percentage of hard reuse (per_i = ti/total_reuse)
The specific variables for Objective 3 are applied to the whole population of ontologies, and they are those shown below:• Number of ontologies that reuse ontologies of the same domain (total_reuse_same_domain).• Percentage of ontologies that reuse ontologies of the same domain (per_reuse_same_domain = total_reuse_same_domain * 100/total_reuse).Let us note that denominators may be zero for some ontologies. In such a case, the percentages are not defined. Note also that the percentages of reuse do not necessarily show which of the reused entities are relevant for the future use of the ontology. This fact specially applies to hard reuse. That is, it is possible that OntoA imports OntoB, but most of OntoB entities are not present in applications based on OntoA. For example, univ-ontology, 8 a vocabulary about universities, imports FOAF. The only FOAF terms appearing in univ-ontology definitions are just foaf:Person, foaf:firstName and foaf:lastName. Hence, to calculate the percentage of reuse, an option would be to consider only these three terms as reused from FOAF. In fact, foaf:yahooChatID, also belonging to FOAF, but referred in no univ-ontology definition, could be considered as not relevant. However, all the terms of FOAF (including foaf:yahooChatID) really belong to univ-ontology and, consequently it is possible to reason with them when this ontology is queried. Evaluation of the variables by means of data collection
The variables were evaluated for each ontology registered in LOV. To do so, an application to extract ontology features as well as to report errors when loading the ontologies was developed by using JAVA as implementation language. 9 Fig. Aggregated measures of the whole population (maximum, minimum, quartiles and mean) were computed by means of the R statistical tool. The population was previously cured by removing ontologies with c, op and dp equals to 0. Ontologies with per_reuse = 100% were deleted as well. There have also been cases of ontologies that had could not be properly loaded.This research also tackles the question whether there exists a well characterized set of ontologies reused by most LOV ontologies. If the answer is yes, then, following the authors' experience, such ontologies are expected to be those whose URI is defined in the http://www.w3.org/ namespace, and those identified by W3C as good ontologies. To achieve Objective 2, the authors had to obtain the number of ontologies that reuse other ontologies of the same domain (total_reuse_same_domain) as well as its percentage with respect to the total number of ontologies that reuse (per_reuse_same_domain). To be able to automatize the process of determining if two ontologies belong to the same domain, the notion of LOV category has been taken as a reference. The category of each ontology is already assigned in LOV, and it has been an input data in this study. Examples of LOV categories are Biology, Geography, Academy, etc. There are ontologies that may be annotated with two different categories. Each LOV category was assumed to be a domain, except for the following categories: Metadata, RDF and W3C Rec. Metadata ontologies are used to annotate other ontologies. An example of an ontology belonging to this category is the Asset Description Metadata Schema (ADMS), The steps presented below were carried out by using R:1. The population of ontologies was reduced to those that reuse. 2. The population of ontologies was again reduced by removing those belonging to the three categories that were not considered domains. 3. The variables total_reuse_same_domain and per_reuse_same_ domain were automatically evaluated by processing the resultant population of the previous step.Modularization is an approach already followed in the development of traditional software. Considering the import of a module as a case of reuse across the same domain does not show the capability that ontologies have for being reused. Consequently, in step 3, for each pair of reusing and reused ontology, the URIs of both of them were compared to determine whether it had been a case of modularization and remove it. The number of LOV ontologies resulting from step 2 and that reused other ontologies apart from its modules was 281.Data analysis
Given that the study has been applied to the whole collection of LOV ontologies, the data analysis was carried out by means of descriptive statistics. In some cases, the numbers were meaningful by themselves. In other cases, box plots were used. For example, to answer the question about the variation of the percentages of reuse according to the different kind of entities (Objective 1), box plots showing the percentages of reuse of classes, object and data properties were generated. These diagrams are presented in a single image in Section 3 and they allowed to appreciate how different the percentages of reuse were.Methodology for objective 3: identify factors that hamper reuse
This part of the research had two phases. The first one consisted in the development of a use case to identify factors that may influence or hamper ontology reuse across the same domain. The second one involved the automatic analysis of the whole population of ontologies to determine to what extend the results of the use case are applicable to other cases.To carry out the first phase, an ontology was developed solely for this purpose. The ontology is intended to specify, in a formal way, a conceptualization for the exchange of information according to the Practical Guide for the Evaluation and Monitoring of Official Degrees of the Madri+d Foundation [10]. It covers the information on official degrees that has to be public according to the Madri+d Foundation. This guide is applicable to all fourteen universities of Madrid. • The Spanish series of Royal Decrees on Higher Education [11-16]. • The aforementioned Madri+d guide.• The guide for accreditation of degrees of the National Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation of Spain (ANECA) [17].• An experienced coordinator of a degree in Information Systems.In addition to providing a basis for a real-case scenario of ontology reuse, the ontology, called OTN (Ontología de Títulos uNiversitarios The 10 ontologies registered in LOV in the category Academy were analyzed to check whether they could be reused in OTN.Once the results of the first phase were known, the ontology features to be observed for the second phase were defined, evaluated and analyzed.Results
This section presents the results achieved towards each objective.Results concerning objective 1 ''measure reuse, hard reuse and soft reuse'' and objective 2 ''measure reuse across the same domain''
Consulting the section Frequencies of exceptions during the loading of ontologies of the PDF report Concerning the evaluation of variables applicable to each ontology of the population, the aggregated measures are presented in Fig. With regard to the reuse of W3C endorsed ontologies, a 78.03% of the ontologies of the population reuse them.Concerning reuse across the same domain, the population of ontologies belonging to none of the categories Metadata, RDF and W3C Rec, and that reused other ontologies apart from their modules, had 281 ontologies. Of these, 56 (19.92%) reused ontologies belonging to the same LOV category.Results concerning objective 3. factors against reuse across the same domain
Development of the use case
The following paragraphs show the problems found when trying to reuse each one of the ontologies classified in LOV under the Academy category during the development of the OTN ontology.When the option of reusing AIISO (Academic Institution Internal Structure Ontology) 1. Heterogeneity between the concepts of the OTN domain and the concepts represented in AIISO. Let us note that the fact that the candidate ontology domain is complementary to the ontology being built to axiomatize the intended conceptualization is not a problem. For example, in Spain, the notion of College does not exist, therefore it is not necessary to complement the OTN with AIISO as it is not required to represent such concept. 2. Heterogeneity in the natural language used. The translation from English to Spanish had required an additional time in the process of reuse. This has been a problem shared by all LOV ontologies belonging to the Academy category.From the case of Courseware, 1. Deficiencies in the documentation. The ontology is just available in XML. An explanatory HTML document could not be consulted.Lots of information due to an imported ontology that is not
available. When the aurhors tried to open the ontology with Protégé, In the case of myExperiment, Other ontologies whose domains do not have enough overlap with the domain of OTN are FRAPO Teach Finally, Ontoware However, domain independent ontologies have been reused. DUL Generalization of the use case
Below are the factors that have hampered the reuse in the use case. We also elaborate on the extent to which this particular use case can be generalized to other LOV ontologies.1. Heterogeneity in the natural language used. LOV provide information above the natural language used to develop the ontology. From the result of a SPARQL query, the percentage of ontologies that use languages apart from English was calculated, which amount to (27.04%). 2. Deficiencies in the documentation. The Curl tool allowed to check each ontology for its corresponding documentation. Just 17.18% of them provide such a documentation. 3. Lost of information due to an imported ontology that is not available. As mentioned in Section 3.1 the complete population of LOV had to be curated due to a subset not being able to load. 4. Unavailable license. For each ontology, it has been checked whether it was licensed according to some of the following descriptions: dct:license, dc:rights, dcterms:rights, dcterms: license, cc:license or xhv:license. The resultant percentage is 60.28%. It should be mentioned that this figure indicates the ontologies in which a license is stated, fact that does not imply that the specified license is open enough to allow their reuse. However, that analysis is out of scope of this paper. 5. Heterogeneity between the subdomains of the reusing and the reused ontologies. The generalization of this factor remains for future work.Global considerations
Given that the study was applied to a whole population of ontologies (LOV), the results have not been expressed in terms of significance. As LOV was not proved to be representative with regard to the rest of repositories, it should not be considered as a sample. Therefore, the results of this paper are strictly only valid for LOV, in the same way as Kamdar and colleagues work [18] is strictly valid for BioPortal.Discussion
One of the most outstanding facts observed during the study is that 36.38% of the ontologies registered in LOV could not be appropriately loaded.Concerning how much reuse is carried out during ontology development, the aggregated measures point out that the percentage of reused entities (per_reuse) have a mean of 30.40% and a median of 21.43%. Regarding reuse of W3C endorsed ontologies, 78.02% of ontologies reuse them. As it can be appreciated in Figs. Let us now suppose that ontology O 1 imports SUMO and that O 2 imports DOLCE. Let us also suppose that O 1 imports O 2 . In this case, O 1 includes contradictory definitions of the term abstract. Given that all the details of the natural language definitions are not formalized in the ontologies, it may be case that no inconsistency appears when a computer reasons with this ontology. However, there will be a contradiction in the intended meaning of the terms of O 1 .Something similar may happen if a redefinition of classes/properties in the reusing ontology [19,20] takes place. Let us suppose, for example, the following axiom: reused : property r d f : subPropertyOf reusing : property If reusing:property were declared as inverse functional, then reused:property would become inverse functional as well. If soft reuse had been carried out, then, formally, the only definition would be the one of the reusing ontology. However, if a third ontology imported both the reused and the reusing ones, there would be, in the third ontology, a formal definition from the reused ontology and another formal definition in the reusing ontology.Concerning the information that was obtained through the OTN use case, several heterogeneity problems were detected. First of all, there are ontologies, in the academic domain, focused on different aspects of such domain but out of the scope of OTN ontology, for example content management, social networking, etc.. Some ontologies represent the same domain as OTN, but from a different perspective. Others do not use Spanish, being the lack of localization [21] a key factor that hampers reuse. In fact, it has been proved that just 27.04% of the LOV ontologies use languages other than English. Other reasons to not reuse LOV ontologies belonging to the Academy category have been deficiencies in the documentation of some candidate ontologies and unreachable imported ontologies.Related work
One of the first analysis on ontology reuse was done by Simperl [22]. The author presents different use cases on ontology reuse as well as methods and tools. The main conclusion is that the reuse approach is a decision-making problem in which the developer experience plays a crucial role. Another interesting study has been performed by Ghazvinian and colleagues [23] with the aim of analyzing the orthogonality in ontologies at the OBO Foundry. Poveda and colleagues [6] analyzed soft and hard reuse in the Linked Data context. This study was performed over 73.96% of the ontologies 35 included in the LOV registry. The study shows that the proportion of reused elements was considerably high (40.53%). In addition, in that time, hard reuse was more frequent than soft reuse, although soft reuse already represented 1/4 of the total. If compared to the results of the present work, that percentage shows an evolution in such a way that the proportion of soft reuse has increased until approximately a half of the total reuse. Also in the Linked Data context, Schaible and colleagues [24] performed a survey to obtain rankings of diverse modeling examples. Participants in the survey should take into account their understanding of good reuse of vocabularies when ranking the models. This study shows that the trend has been to reuse popular terms from frequently used ontologies instead of using terms from not popular ontologies. This result is consistent with the present work.Focusing on the BioPortal repository, Kamdar and colleagues [18] analyzed the reuse in 377 biomedical ontologies. As a general conclusion, the reuse among biomedical ontologies is quite limited (less than 5%). Let us note that this percentage is much lower than that obtained by Poveda and colleagues and that obtained by us. Consequently, this reflects that the reuse percentage in LOV is a great deal higher than that of BioPortal. Likewise, these authors have detected that the knowledge reused belongs to a small set of popular ontologies [5]. Kamdar and colleagues [5] also discovered that, in many cases, developers use incorrect representations when 34 http://www.obofoundry.org/.35 196 ontologies within the 265 registered at the time of performing the analysis.reusing terms from different ontologies. Thanks to this study, a set of common antipatterns when reusing ontology terms has been identified. Ochs and colleagues [25] made an analysis of 355 ontologies in BioPortal. As a result of this analysis, it can be mentioned that 55% of the analyzed ontologies includes elements (classes or properties) from other ontologies. In addition, the work showed that knowledge reuse is specially widespread among the ontologies in the OBO Foundry.Conclusions and future trends
While in software development it is common to reuse APIs, experienced engineers address the reuse with caution. More precisely, usually the reuse is done by means of commercial agreements with the company providing it or the reused software is supported and maintained by a reliable community.In the case of ontologies, scarcely ever an ontology is maintained by a company that commercializes the reuse of the ontology. An ontology being maintained and updated by a community similar to those of free software is not frequent either. In consequence, a candidate ontology to be reused may not reach minimal adoption requirements or it may not be always available online (as shown in the results). In addition, many ontologies do not include an explicit declaration of their license [26], therefore, the fact that the ontology is actually available online does not imply that it can be legally reused. Along the development of the use case, this has been found to be an obstacle to reuse ontologies.Another important issue detected concerns the assumption that both English, as the lingua franca in certain fields as research or computer science, and the conceptualizations from countries leading the progress in such fields, are the reference when developing ontologies. In practice, however, when an official organism or a company from a concrete country needs and ontology, they usually need it in the country's official language and it has to model the specific conceptualizations of the domain given. For example, focusing in the use case, even after the Bolonia 36 harmonization process carried out by the European Union, the Spanish university system still presents particular characteristics. In order for ontologies to be adapted to the specific necessities of different groups (communities), the projects to develop them have to be supplied of the extra resources necessary to develop localized ontologies.From the previous paragraphs the following lines of work emerge as promising. First of all, a change of mentality is needed regarding ontology development and maintenance. In this sense, processes as those used by organizations like Apache 37,38 for software development could be taken as inspiration for ontology development. In consequence, research on collaborative development [27,28] is key in order to produce reusable ontologies. Secondly, it is crucial to continue the research being carried out on ontology localization [21] in order to identify those ontology modules independent of a region or country. Finally, tools for ontology modularization (e.g. Ontofox [29] or the Protégé functionality to merge axioms) and methods (e.g. NeOn approach [30] or MIREOT [31]) deserve special attention, as in practical settings they might represent the key for users to extract only those ontology submodules needed, or to import an ontology as a whole or not to reuse ontological resources at all. In any case, reusability does not come for free, and a realistic view should be taken assuming that the reusability degree will depend on the resources dedicated to such goal. 36 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ES/TXT/?uri=URISERV%3Ac11088. 37 https://www.apache.org/foundation/getinvolved.html. 38 https://www.apache.org/dev/new-committers-guide.html.Fig. 1 .
1 . 3 . 4 . 5 .
Fig. 3 .Fig. 4 .
Fig. 5 .
•
ndnop) * 100/op). • Percentage of reused data properties (per_reuse_dp = (idp + ndndp) * 100/dp). • Percentage of reused entities (per_reuse = total_reuse * 100/total).http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/.http://dublincore.org/.http://owlapi.sourceforge.net/.https://www.r-project.org/.The Academic Degree Ontology (Ontología de Títulos uNiversitarios) is available at https://w3id.org/def/otn.See http://www.oeg-upm.net/files/mpoveda/JWS2017-Reuse/ OntologiesAnalysis.pdf.